  丁  【てい】  4th in rank, fourth sign of the Chinese calendar, Denmark
  丁卯  【ひのとう】  fourth of the sexagenary cycle

  世  【よ】  world, society, age, generation
  世の中  【よのなか】  society, the world, the times
  浮世  【うきよ】  fleeting life, this transient world, floating world, sad world, world of grief and worry, the world of the living, this life, this world, the present world, (the world of the) red light districts
  君が代  【きみがよ】  Imperial reign, Kimigayo (Japanese national anthem)



  主  【ぬし】  head (of a household, etc.), leader, master, owner, proprietor, proprietress, subject (of a rumour, etc.), doer (of a deed), guardian spirit (e.g. long-resident beast, usu. with mystical powers), long-time resident (or employee, etc.), husband, you
  馬主  【うまぬし】  (race)horse owner
  船主  【せんしゅ】  shipowner
  主  【おも】  chief, main, principal, important, main secondary or supporting role (in kyogen)
  主に  【おもに】  mainly, primarily
  主  【あるじ】  head (of a household), proprietor (of a store), proprietress, landlord, landlady, master (of a servant), entertaining someone as one's guest
  女主  【おんなあるじ】  female owner, proprietress, landlady
  坊の主  【ぼうのあるじ】  master of the priests quarters

  乗る  【のる】  to get on (train, plane, bus, ship, etc.), to get in, to board, to take, to embark, to get on (e.g. a footstool), to step on, to jump on, to sit on, to mount, to reach, to go over, to pass, to follow, to stay (on track), to go with (the times, etc.), to take part, to participate, to join, to get into the swing (and sing, dance, etc.), to be deceived, to be taken in, to be carried, to be spread, to be scattered, to stick, to attach, to take, to go on
  伸るか反るか  【のるかそるか】  win or lose, sink or swim, make or break, all or nothing
  乗せる  【のせる】  to place on (something), to give (someone) a ride, to give a lift, to pick up, to help on board, to load (luggage), to carry, to take on board, to send out (on the airwaves, etc.), to deceive, to take for a ride, to (sing) along with (musical accompaniment), to let (someone) take part, to excite (someone), to publish (an article), to run (an ad)

  予め  【あらかじめ】  beforehand, in advance, previously
  あらかじめ計画  【あらかじめけいかく】  advance plans, forward plans

  事  【こと】  thing, matter, incident, occurrence, event, something serious, trouble, crisis, circumstances, situation, state of affairs, work, business, affair, after an inflectable word, creates a noun phrase indicating something the speaker does not feel close to, nominalizing suffix, pretending to ..., playing make-believe ..., alias, aka, nickname, alternative name, also known as
  事故  【じこ】  accident, incident, trouble, circumstances, reasons
  いっその事  【いっそのこと】  rather, sooner, preferably
  神事  【しんじ】  Shinto ritual
  仕える  【つかえる】  to serve, to work for, to attend

  仕える  【つかえる】  to serve, to work for, to attend

  他  【ほか】  other (place, thing, person), the rest, outside, beyond, nothing except, nothing but, nothing apart from, nothing aside from, no choice (but to), besides..., in addition to...
  他に  【ほかに】  in addition, besides
  殊の外  【ことのほか】  exceedingly, extremely, exceptionally, unusually, unexpectedly

  替わる  【かわる】  to succeed, to relieve, to replace, to take the place of, to substitute for, to take over for, to represent, to hand over (telephone), to be exchanged, to change (places with), to switch
  代わる代わる  【かわるがわる】  alternately, by turns
  替わる  【かわる】  to succeed, to relieve, to replace, to take the place of, to substitute for, to take over for, to represent, to hand over (telephone), to be exchanged, to change (places with), to switch
  代わる代わる  【かわるがわる】  alternately, by turns
  代わり  【かわり】  substitute, replacement, substituting, replacing, stand-in, proxy, alternate, deputy, relief, successor, compensation, exchange, return, second helping, another cup, seconds, upcoming program, upcoming programme
  代わりに  【かわりに】  instead of, for, as, in exchange for, in return (for), to make up for
  代わり  【かわり】  substitute, replacement, substituting, replacing, stand-in, proxy, alternate, deputy, relief, successor, compensation, exchange, return, second helping, another cup, seconds, upcoming program, upcoming programme
  代わりに  【かわりに】  instead of, for, as, in exchange for, in return (for), to make up for
  換える  【かえる】  to replace, to exchange, to interchange, to substitute
  世  【よ】  world, society, age, generation
  代々  【だいだい】  for generations, hereditary, generation after generation
  千代  【せんだい】  thousand years, very long period, forever
  君が代  【きみがよ】  Imperial reign, Kimigayo (Japanese national anthem)
  代  【しろ】  substitution, material, price, margin (e.g. for stapling, etc.), area required for something, shiro (unit of land area equal to one-fiftieth of a tan; ~19.83 m.sq.)
  代物  【しろもの】  article, goods, product, fine thing, fellow, affair, stuff, prostitute
  阿代  【あしろ】  Ophidion asiro (species of cusk eel)
  食い代  【くいしろ】  food expenses

  住む  【すむ】  to live (of humans), to reside, to inhabit, to dwell, to abide
  住まう  【すまう】  to live, to reside, to inhabit

  使う  【つかう】  to use (a thing, method, etc.), to make use of, to put to use, to use (a person, animal, puppet, etc.), to employ, to handle, to manage, to manipulate, to use (time, money, etc.), to spend, to consume, to use (language), to speak
  使い  【つかい】  errand, mission, going as envoy, messenger, bearer, errand boy, errand girl, familiar spirit, use, usage, user, trainer, tamer, charmer
  使い道  【つかいみち】  purpose, utility, objective, way to use something
  春の使い  【はるのつかい】  Japanese bush warbler, messenger of spring

  係る  【かかる】  to be the work of, to be the result of, to be done by, to concern, to affect, to involve, to relate to
  係  【かかり】  charge, duty, person in charge, official, clerk, connection, linking
  係員  【かかりいん】  official (e.g. customs), clerk in charge
  口座係  【こうざかかり】  teller (in bank)
  応接係  【おうせつかかり】  receptionist, desk clerk
  関わる  【かかわる】  to be affected, to be influenced, to be concerned with, to have to do with, to stick to (opinions)



  全く  【まったく】  really, truly, entirely, completely, wholly, perfectly, indeed, good grief (expression of exasperation)
  全くする  【まったくする】  to accomplish, to fulfill, to carry out
  全て  【すべて】  everything, all, the whole, entirely, completely, wholly, all
  すべての道はローマに通ず  【すべてのみちはローマにつうず】  All roads lead to Rome

  備える  【そなえる】  to furnish with, to equip with, to provide, to install, to prepare for, to make preparations for, to make provision for, to possess (all that is needed), to be endowed with, to be equipped with, to be born with, to have since birth
  具に  【つぶさに】  in detail, with great care, completely, fully

  写す  【うつす】  to transcribe, to duplicate, to reproduce, to imitate, to trace, to describe, to film, to picture, to photograph
  写る  【うつる】  to be photographed, to be projected
  写し  【うつし】  copy, duplicate, facsimile, transcript
  映し出す  【うつしだす】  to project, to show, to portray, to depict, to describe, to reflect



  助ける  【たすける】  to save, to rescue, to help, to assist, to aid, to contribute (financially), to facilitate, to stimulate
  助かる  【たすかる】  to be saved, to be rescued, to survive, to escape harm, to be spared damage, to be helped, to be saved trouble
  助  【すけ】  assistance, help, helper, babe, chick, broad
  助手  【じょしゅ】  assistant, helper, assistant (to a professor)
  福助  【ふくすけ】  large-headed dwarf statue, bringer of good luck
  陀羅尼助  【だらにすけ】  traditional "Chinese" medicine for the stomach (usually prepared as small dark spherical pills)

  努める  【つとめる】  to endeavor (endeavour), to try, to strive, to make an effort, to exert oneself, to be diligent, to be committed (to doing something)

  動く  【うごく】  to move, to stir, to shift, to shake, to swing, to operate, to run, to go, to work, to be touched, to be influenced, to change, to vary, to fluctuate, to waver, certain, factual, to be transferred
  動く歩道  【うごくほどう】  moving walkway, moving sidewalk, travelator
  動かす  【うごかす】  to move, to shift, to stir, to budge, to change position, to inspire, to rouse, to move (e.g. feeling), to influence, to change, to alter, to deny, to operate, to set in motion, to get going, to mobilize (e.g. troops), to mobilise, to deploy, to manage (e.g. funds)

  勝つ  【かつ】  to win, to gain victory
  褐色  【かちいろ】  dark indigo (almost black)
  勝る  【まさる】  to excel, to surpass, to exceed, to have an edge, to be superior, to outrival, to outweigh, to preponderate
  優るとも劣らない  【まさるともおとらない】  not at all inferior to, rival or surpass, compare favorably (with)
  優れる  【すぐれる】  to surpass, to outstrip, to excel
  勝つ  【かつ】  to win, to gain victory
  褐色  【かちいろ】  dark indigo (almost black)

  化ける  【ばける】  to take the form of (esp. in ref. to a spirit, fox, raccoon dog, etc.), to assume the shape of, to turn oneself into, to transform oneself into, to disguise oneself as, to change radically, to metamorphose, to improve unexpectedly and dramatically (esp. of an actor, artist, rikishi, etc.)
  化かす  【ばかす】  to bewitch, to confuse, to enchant, to delude
  老ける  【ふける】  to age, to grow old (esp. in appearance), to show marks of age



  医する  【いする】  to cure, to heal
  薬師  【くすし】  doctor

  去る  【さる】  to leave, to go away, to pass, to elapse, to be distant, to send away, to drive off, to divorce, ... completely, last ... (e.g. "last April")
  去る十一月  【さるじゅういちがつ】  last November

  反る  【そる】  to warp, to curve, to arch, to bend, to bend backward (body or body part, e.g. fingers)
  反らす  【そらす】  to bend, to warp, to curve
  返す  【かえす】  to return (something), to restore, to put back, to turn over, to turn upside down, to overturn, to pay back, to retaliate, to reciprocate, to repeat ..., to do ... back
  返る  【かえる】  to return, to come back, to go back, to turn over, to become extremely, to become completely

  取る  【とる】  to take, to pick up, to harvest, to earn, to win, to choose, to steal, to eat, to have (a meal), to remove (one's glasses, etc.), to compete (in sumo, cards, etc.), to play
  取るに足らない  【とるにたらない】  worthless, valueless
  取り  【とり】  taking, taker, collecting, collector, remover, removal, last performer of the day (usu. the star performer), last performance of the day, active partner (e.g. in judo demonstration), emphatic or formal prefix
  取り替える  【とりかえる】  to exchange, to replace
  ちり取り  【ちりとり】  dustpan
  関取  【せきとり】  ranking wrestler in the makuuchi (senior-grade) or juryo (junior-grade) divisions
  取り  【とり】  taking, taker, collecting, collector, remover, removal, last performer of the day (usu. the star performer), last performance of the day, active partner (e.g. in judo demonstration), emphatic or formal prefix
  取り替える  【とりかえる】  to exchange, to replace
  ちり取り  【ちりとり】  dustpan
  関取  【せきとり】  ranking wrestler in the makuuchi (senior-grade) or juryo (junior-grade) divisions

  受ける  【うける】  to receive, to get, to catch (e.g. a ball), to be struck by (wind, waves, sunlight, etc.), to sustain (damage), to incur (a loss), to suffer (an injury), to feel (influence), to undergo (e.g. surgery), to take (a test), to accept (a challenge), to be given (e.g. life, talent), to follow, to succeed, to be descended from, to face (south, etc.), to be modified by, to obtain (a pawned item, etc.) by paying a fee, to be well-received, to become popular, to go down well, to be funny, to be humorous
  受かる  【うかる】  to pass (examination)



  向く  【むく】  to turn toward, to look (up, down, etc.), to face (e.g. east), to look out on, to point to, to be suited to, to be fit for, to go in the direction of, to lean towards (of a feeling)
  向いている  【むいている】  to be cut out for (e.g. a job), to be suited (to)
  向ける  【むける】  to turn towards, to point
  向かう  【むかう】  to face, to go towards, to head towards
  向かうところ敵無し  【むかうところてきなし】  unbeatable, invincible, irresistible
  向い  【むかい】  facing, opposite, across the street, other side
  向かい合う  【むかいあう】  to be opposite, to face each other
  向こう  【むこう】  opposite side, other side, opposite direction, over there, that way, far away, beyond, the other party, the other person, future (starting now)
  向こう側  【むこうがわ】  other side, opposite side, other party
  向こう  【むこう】  opposite side, other side, opposite direction, over there, that way, far away, beyond, the other party, the other person, future (starting now)
  向こう側  【むこうがわ】  other side, opposite side, other party
  向い  【むかい】  facing, opposite, across the street, other side
  向かい合う  【むかいあう】  to be opposite, to face each other

  君  【きみ】  you, buddy, pal, monarch, ruler, sovereign, (one's) master
  君たち  【きみたち】  you (plural), all of you, you all
  大君  【おおきみ】  emperor, king, prince
  嫁が君  【よめがきみ】  mouse (euphemism used during the first three days of the year)

  味  【あじ】  flavor, flavour, taste, charm, style, experience, smart, clever, witty, strange
  味わう  【あじわう】  to taste, to savor, to savour, to relish, to appreciate, to enjoy, to relish, to digest, to experience, to go through, to taste (e.g. victory), to know (e.g. pain)
  持ち味  【もちあじ】  inherent flavor, inherent flavour, natural taste, distinctive characteristic (of a person, work, etc.), peculiar quality, special ability
  一味  【ひとあじ】  unique flavor (flavour), peculiar flavor
  味わう  【あじわう】  to taste, to savor, to savour, to relish, to appreciate, to enjoy, to relish, to digest, to experience, to go through, to taste (e.g. victory), to know (e.g. pain)

  命  【いのち】  life, life force, lifetime, lifespan, most important thing, foundation, core, paired tattoos of the "life" kanji on the upper arms of a man and woman (indicating unwavering love), fate, destiny, karma
  命からがら  【いのちからがら】  for dear life, barely escaping alive
  貴い命  【たっといいのち】  precious life
  露の命  【つゆのいのち】  life as evanescent as the dew

  和らぐ  【やわらぐ】  to soften, to calm down, to be eased, to be mitigated, to subside, to abate
  和らげる  【やわらげる】  to soften, to moderate, to relieve
  和む  【なごむ】  to be softened, to calm down
  和やか  【なごやか】  mild, calm, gentle, quiet, congenial, amicable, amiable, friendly, genial, harmonious, peaceful
  和やかな家庭  【なごやかなかてい】  harmonious (happy) family
  和える  【あえる】  to dress (vegetables, salad, etc.)

  品  【しな】  article, item, thing, goods, stock, quality, flirtatiousness, coquetry
  品物  【しなもの】  goods, article, thing
  粗品  【そしな】  inferior goods, low-quality article, trifling gift, gift given out by companies to customers as a token of gratitude, marketing incentive
  一品  【いっぴん】  item, article, dish, course, finest item



  商う  【あきなう】  to trade in (commercial goods), to deal in, to sell

  問う  【とう】  to ask, to inquire, to charge (e.g. with a crime), to accuse, without regard to, to not matter, to call into question, to doubt, to question
  問うに落ちず語るに落ちる  【とうにおちずかたるにおちる】  to keep a secret when asked about it, but let it slip inadvertently when chatting on another occasion
  問い  【とい】  question, query
  問い合わせ  【といあわせ】  enquiry, inquiry, query, interrogation, ENQ
  問屋  【とんや】  wholesale store, wholesale dealer, wholesaler

  坂  【さか】  slope, hill
  坂道  【さかみち】  hill road
  急坂  【きゅうはん】  steep slope, steep gradient
  急な坂  【きゅうなさか】  sudden drop, precipitous slope



  始める  【はじめる】  to start, to begin, to commence, to initiate, to originate, to open (e.g. a store), to start up, to establish (business. etc.), to start ..., to begin to ...
  始まる  【はじまる】  to begin, to start, to commence, to happen (again), to begin (anew), to date (from), to originate (in)

  委ねる  【ゆだねる】  to entrust (a matter) to, to leave to, to abandon oneself to (e.g. pleasure), to yield to (e.g. anger), to devote oneself to

  守る  【まもる】  to protect, to guard, to defend, to keep (i.e. a promise), to abide (by the rules), to observe, to obey, to follow
  守り  【まもり】  protection, defense, defence, providence, amulet, charm, talisman
  守り抜く  【まもりぬく】  to hold fast, to protect to the end
  島主  【とうしゅ】  island chief
  山守  【やまもり】  ranger (forest), mountain guardian
  守り  【もり】  babysitting, babysitter, protecting, keeping, keeper
  守り立てる  【もりたてる】  to bring up, to support, to rally
  井守  【いもり】  newt (esp. the Japanese fire belly newt, Cynops pyrrhogaster)
  足無井守  【あしなしいもり】  caecilian (any burrowing legless amphibian of the order Gymnophiona)
  守  【かみ】  director (of the provincial governors under the ritsuryo system)
  肥後守  【ひごのかみ】  higonokami, type of folding knife with metal handle
  薩摩の守  【さつまのかみ】  traveling while deliberately not paying a fare (travelling)

  安い  【やすい】  cheap, inexpensive, calm, peaceful, quiet
  休まる  【やすまる】  to be rested, to feel at ease, to repose, to be relieved
  安  【やす】  cheap, rash, thoughtless, careless, indiscreet, frivolous
  安い  【やすい】  cheap, inexpensive, calm, peaceful, quiet
  目安  【めやす】  criterion, standard, yardstick, reference, aim, rough estimate, approximation
  最安  【さいやす】  cheapest, lowest price
  安らか  【やすらか】  peaceful, tranquil, calm, restful
  安らかな眠り  【やすらかなねむり】  peaceful sleep

  定める  【さだめる】  to decide, to establish, to determine
  定まる  【さだまる】  to become settled, to be fixed
  定か  【さだか】  definite, sure

  実  【み】  fruit, nut, seed, (in broth) pieces of meat, vegetable, etc., content, substance
  実る  【みのる】  to bear fruit, to ripen
  浮き実  【うきみ】  soup garnish
  桷  【ずみ】  Toringo crabapple (Malus sieboldii)
  実る  【みのる】  to bear fruit, to ripen
  誠  【まこと】  truth, reality, sincerity, honesty, integrity, fidelity, that's right
  実に  【じつに】  indeed, really, absolutely, truly, actually, very, quite
  嘘から出た実  【うそからでたまこと】  truth comes out of falsehood, many a true word is spoken in jest
  実る  【みのる】  to bear fruit, to ripen
  実り  【みのり】  ripening (of a crop), crop, harvest



  宮  【みや】  shrine, palace, imperial residence, member of the imperial family, headboard (on a bed), headstand, temple
  宮家  【みやけ】  house of a prince of the blood
  若宮  【わかみや】  young imperial prince, child of the imperial family, shrine dedicated to a child of the god of the main shrine, newly built shrine (to which a divided tutelary deity has just been transferred)
  大宮  【おおみや】  imperial palace, shrine, Grand Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, woman of imperial lineage who has borne a child, elderly woman of imperial lineage

  宿  【やど】  lodging, inn, hotel, house, home, dwelling, home of a servant's parents (or guarantor, etc.)
  宿屋  【やどや】  inn
  連れ込み宿  【つれこみやど】  traditional love hotel, traditional Japanese inn specially for couples
  相宿  【あいやど】  staying in the same inn or hotel, rooming together
  宿る  【やどる】  to dwell, to live, to remain, to stay at, to take shelter at, to stop at, to lodge at, to be pregnant, to be part of a constellation, to be a parasite (bugs, plants, etc.)
  宿す  【やどす】  to keep (guest), to give lodging to, to house, to conceive, to carry (virus), to entrust

  寒い  【さむい】  cold (e.g. weather), uninteresting (esp. joke), lame, dull, weak, corny

  対手  【たいしゅ】  opponent (in combat)
  向かう  【むかう】  to face, to go towards, to head towards

  局  【つぼね】  court lady, lady-in-waiting (Heian period), separate room in a palace (esp. for a lady) (Heian period), room for a very low class prostitute, very low class prostitute
  局女郎  【つぼねじょろう】  prostitute of the lowest class (Edo period)
  御局  【おつぼね】  court lady with her own private chamber or office, low-class prostitute (Edo period)

  屋  【や】  (something) shop, somebody who sells (something) or works as (something), somebody with a (certain) personality trait, house, roof
  屋根  【やね】  roof
  問屋  【とんや】  wholesale store, wholesale dealer, wholesaler
  居酒屋  【いざかや】  izakaya, Japanese bar that also serves various dishes and snacks

  岸  【きし】  bank, coast, shore
  岸辺  【きしべ】  shore, bank (of a body of water)
  彼の岸  【かのきし】  nirvana

  島  【しま】  island, territory (of a prostitute, organized crime gang, etc.), turf
  島国  【しまぐに】  island country
  千島  【ちしま】  Kurile Islands
  蓬が島  【よもぎがしま】  Mount Penglai, Japan

  州  【す】  sandbank, sandbar
  洲浜  【すはま】  sandy beach, sandbar that projects into the ocean, particularly in a wavy form, designs and objects with a wavy pattern, sweet mochi cake
  白州  【しらす】  white sandbar, white sandbank, area in a garden or entrance of a house laid with white sand or pebbles, gravel separating a Noh stage from the audience, court of law in the Edo period, in which the parties sat on white sand
  中州  【なかす】  sandbank (in a river), sandbar

  帳  【とばり】  curtain, hanging, bunting
  夜の帳  【よるのとばり】  veil of darkness, curtain of night

  平ら  【たいら】  flatness, level, smooth, calm, plain, sitting tailor fashion
  平らげる  【たいらげる】  to eat up (completely), to put down (a rebellion), to suppress, to subjugate, to make flat, to level out
  平  【ひら】  something broad and flat, common, ordinary, plain, rank-and-file, low-ranking employee, freshman, novice, private
  平日  【へいじつ】  weekday, ordinary days (i.e. non-holiday), kanji radical 73
  手のひら  【てのひら】  palm (of one's hand)
  嘉平次平  【かへいじひら】  hakama fabric made from meisen silk

  幸い  【さいわい】  happiness, blessedness, luck, fortune, felicity, luckily, fortunately
  幸いあれ  【さいわいあれ】  Be happy!, Cheer up!
  幸  【さち】  good luck, fortune, happiness, harvest, yield
  幸あれ  【さちあれ】  good luck!, all the best
  山幸  【やまさち】  food of the mountains (wild game, mountain vegetables, mushrooms, etc.), fruits of the land
  海幸  【うみさち】  seafood, products of the sea, marine products, fruits of the sea
  幸せ  【しあわせ】  happiness, good fortune, luck, blessing
  幸せ者  【しあわせもの】  fortunate person, lucky fellow, lucky dog

  度  【たび】  time (three times, each time, etc.), times
  度々  【たびたび】  often, again and again, over and over again, repeatedly, frequently
  千度  【せんど】  thousand times
  その度  【そのたび】  each time

  蔵  【くら】  warehouse, storehouse, cellar, magazine, granary, godown, depository, treasury, elevator
  庫入れ  【くらいれ】  warehousing
  神庫  【ほくら】  small shrine, depository for sacred objects

  庭  【にわ】  garden, yard, courtyard, field (of action), area
  庭木  【にわき】  garden tree
  奥庭  【おくにわ】  inner garden, back yard
  苔庭  【こけにわ】  moss garden





  待つ  【まつ】  to wait, to await, to look forward to, to anticipate, to depend on, to need
  待つ身は長い  【まつみはながい】  A watched pot never boils

  急ぐ  【いそぐ】  to hurry, to rush, to hasten, to make something happen sooner
  急ぎ  【いそぎ】  haste, hurry, expedition, speed, dispatch
  急ぎ足  【いそぎあし】  fast pace, quick pace

  息  【いき】  breath, breathing, tone, mood
  意気込む  【いきごむ】  to be enthusiastic about, to be eager, to be keen
  鼻息  【はないき】  nasal breathing, person's pleasure, excitement
  寝息  【ねいき】  breathing of a sleeping person

  悪い  【わるい】  bad, poor, inferior, evil, sinful, unprofitable, unbeneficial, at fault, to blame, in the wrong, sorry
  悪い風邪  【わるいかぜ】  bad cold
  悪し  【あし】  evil
  悪し様  【あしざま】  unfavourable, unfavorable
  憎い  【にくい】  hateful, abominable, poor-looking, detestable, amazing, fantastic, admirable, lovely, wonderful
  難い  【にくい】  difficult to ..., hard to ...
  憎む  【にくむ】  to hate, to detest

  悲しい  【かなしい】  sad, sorrowful
  悲しい出来事  【かなしいできごと】  sad event
  悲しむ  【かなしむ】  to be sad, to mourn for, to regret
  悲しむべき境遇  【かなしむべききょうぐう】  pitiable condition

  思う  【おもう】  to think, to consider, to believe, to think (of doing), to plan (to do), to judge, to assess, to regard, to imagine, to suppose, to dream, to expect, to look forward to, to feel, to desire, to want, to recall, to remember





  所  【ところ】  place, spot, scene, site, address, district, area, locality, one's house, point, aspect, side, facet, passage (in text), part, space, room, thing, matter, whereupon, as a result, about to, on the verge of, was just doing, was in the process of doing, have just done, just finished doing
  所が  【ところが】  even so, however, still, whereupon, even though, nevertheless, on the contrary, as a matter of fact, despite
  一所  【いっしょ】  one place, the same place, one person, together
  詩人らしい所  【しじんらしいところ】  something of a poet
  所か  【どころか】  far from, anything but, not at all, let alone, to say nothing of, not to speak of, much less
  所ではない  【どころではない】  (strongly emphatic) too preoccupied or busy to even think of ..., .. is out of the question, this is not an occasion for
  大所  【おおどころ】  wealthy family, important person, bigwig
  居所  【いどころ】  whereabouts, address, place of temporary residence
  所  【ところ】  place, spot, scene, site, address, district, area, locality, one's house, point, aspect, side, facet, passage (in text), part, space, room, thing, matter, whereupon, as a result, about to, on the verge of, was just doing, was in the process of doing, have just done, just finished doing
  所が  【ところが】  even so, however, still, whereupon, even though, nevertheless, on the contrary, as a matter of fact, despite
  早いとこ  【はやいとこ】  promptly, quickly
  僕んとこ  【ぼくんとこ】  at my place

  打つ  【うつ】  to hit, to strike, to knock, to beat, to punch, to slap, to tap, to bang, to clap, to pound, to strike (noon, etc.), to sound (cymbals, etc.), to beat (a drum, etc.), to beat (rhythmically, e.g. pulse, waves, etc.), to move, to impress, to touch, to drive in, to hammer in, to put in, to inject, to type, to send, to transmit, to insert, to write in, to mark, to make (noodles, etc.), to prepare, to till (soil), to sprinkle, to throw, to cast, to do, to carry out, to play, to perform, to engage in (gambling, etc.), to pay (a deposit, etc.), to visit (on a pilgrimage), to line (a coat), to bind (a criminal)
  打つ手  【うつて】  way to do (something)
  打つ  【ぶつ】  to hit (a person), to strike, to beat, to deliver (a speech), to give (an address)
  打つかる  【ぶつかる】  to strike against, to collide with, to bump into, to conflict, to encounter, to meet, to clash

  投げる  【なげる】  to throw, to cast away, to face defeat, to give up

  拾う  【ひろう】  to pick up, to find, to gather

  持つ  【もつ】  to hold (in one's hand), to take, to carry, to possess, to have, to own, to maintain, to keep, to last, to be durable, to keep, to survive, to take charge of, to be in charge of
  持子  【もつご】  topmouth gudgeon, stone moroko (Pseudorasbora parva)
  持てる  【もてる】  to be able to possess (hold, get, etc.), to be well liked, to be popular, to be pampered (spoiled, doted upon, etc.), to be welcomed, to endure (the tests of time, the elements, etc.), to last, possessed, possessing riches, having wealth
  持てる者と持たざる者  【もてるものともたざるもの】  haves and have-nots

  指  【ゆび】  finger, toe, digit
  指輪  【ゆびわ】  (finger) ring
  中指  【なかゆび】  middle finger, long finger, second finger, tall finger, middle toe, third toe
  後ろ指  【うしろゆび】  being talked about or backbitten
  指す  【さす】  to point, to nominate, to select someone, to specify some person, to identify, to indicate, to point out, to play (a game of shogi), to move (a piece), to extend one's arm straight ahead (in dance)
  刺股  【さすまた】  sasumata, man catcher, two-pronged weapon for catching criminals

  放す  【はなす】  to release, to let go, to free, to set free, to let loose, to turn loose, to add (pieces of eggplant, potato, etc.) to water, broth, etc.
  放つ  【はなつ】  to fire (gun, arrow, questions, etc.), to shoot, to hit (e.g. baseball), to break wind, to set free, to release, to let loose, to emit (e.g. light), to give off (e.g. a scent), to send out (a person to carry out a duty), to set fire to
  放れる  【はなれる】  to get free, to be freed, to be released
  放く  【こく】  to let loose (e.g. a fart), to utter (e.g. a lie), to do
  放る  【ほうる】  to throw, to fling, to hurl, to toss, to neglect, to abandon, to leave alone, to give up on, to leave undone, to leave unfinished

  整える  【ととのえる】  to put in order, to arrange, to tidy up, to straighten, to adjust, to fix, to get ready, to prepare, to arrange, to supply, to assemble, to buy, to work out (e.g. business deal), to arrange (e.g. marriage), to settle
  整う  【ととのう】  to be ready, to be prepared, to be arranged, to be in order, to be put in order, to be well-ordered, to be well-proportioned, to be harmonious, to be adjusted, to be regulated, to be refined (e.g. of a face), to be settled (e.g. treaty, contract), to be completed

  旅  【たび】  travel, trip, journey
  旅先  【たびさき】  destination, goal (of travel), place one stays during a journey
  船旅  【ふなたび】  trip by boat, sea voyage, cruise, sailing
  あてなき旅  【あてなきたび】  journey without a destination



  昔  【むかし】  olden days, former
  昔話  【むかしばなし】  old tale, folk tale, legend, reminiscence
  一昔  【ひとむかし】  ages, long time, decade, the past ten years
  久しい昔  【ひさしいむかし】  a long time ago



  暑い  【あつい】  hot, warm, sultry, heated, passionate, impassioned, burning (desire, etc.), on everybody's mind, on the radar, du jour, interested (gaze, etc.)
  暑い盛り  【あついさかり】  heat of the day, hottest part of the day

  暗い  【くらい】  dark, gloomy, murky, depressed, dispirited, down in the dumps, dark (mood), dark (in colour), dull, ill-boding, dark (e.g. past), suspicious, unlikely (to succeed), hopeless, unpromising, unfamiliar (with), ignorant (of)
  暗い色  【くらいいろ】  dark color, dark colour
  眩む  【くらむ】  to be dazzled by, to be dizzied by, to be disoriented by, to be lost in (greed, lust, etc.), to become dark
  暮れる  【くれる】  to get dark, to grow dark, to end (of a day, year, season, etc.), to come to an end, to close, to be sunk in (e.g. despair), to be lost in (e.g. thought), to be overcome with

  曲がる  【まがる】  to bend, to curve, to warp, to wind, to twist, to turn, to be awry, to be askew, to be crooked
  曲げる  【まげる】  to bend, to crook, to bow, to curve, to curl, to lean, to tilt, to incline, to slant, to bend (the truth), to distort, to twist, to pervert, to yield (a point), to depart (from a principle), to ignore (what one really thinks), to pawn
  隈  【くま】  corner, nook, recess, a shadow, a shade

  有る  【ある】  to be, to exist, to live, to have, to be located, to be equipped with, to happen, to come about
  ある限り  【あるかぎり】  all (there is), as long as there is





  板  【いた】  board, plank, sheet (of metal), plate (of glass), pane, slab, cutting board, chopping board, chef (esp. of high-end Japanese cuisine), cook, stage (i.e. at a theatre)
  板につく  【いたにつく】  to get used to one's work, to become accustomed to one's position, to be at home (on the stage)
  スキー板  【スキーいた】  ski, skis
  まな板  【まないた】  chopping board

  柱  【はしら】  pillar, post, support, prop, mainstay, counter for buddhas, gods, nobles, etc.
  柱書  【はしらがき】  introductory clause of a law, patent, etc., chapeau, main paragraph
  杖柱  【つえはしら】  person upon whom one relies
  心の柱  【しんのはしら】  central pillar of a pagoda

  根  【ね】  root (of a plant), root (of a tooth, hair, etc.), center (of a pimple, etc.), root (of all evil, etc.), source, origin, cause, basis, one's true nature, (fishing) reef
  根回し  【ねまわし】  making necessary arrangements, laying the groundwork, digging around the roots of a tree (before transplanting)
  心根  【こころね】  innermost feelings, heart, motive, nature, disposition, spirit
  島根  【しまね】  island country

  植える  【うえる】  to plant, to grow, to raise, to insert, to transplant, to implant, to set (type), to inoculate (e.g. an infectious agent), to instill (idea, value, etc.), to instil, to inculcate
  植わる  【うわる】  to be planted

  業  【わざ】  deed, act, work, performance
  業師  【わざし】  tricky wrestler, shrewd fellow
  神業  【かみわざ】  divine work, miracle, superhuman feat, Shinto ritual
  寝技  【ねわざ】  (in wrestling or judo) pinning technique, underhanded dealings

  様  【さま】  Mr., Mrs., Miss, Ms., makes words more polite (usu. in fixed expressions), state, situation, appearance
  様々  【さまざま】  varied, various
  神様  【かみさま】  God, god, ace, king, superior person, god (amongst men)
  ご苦労様  【ごくろうさま】  thank you for your hard work, I appreciate your efforts
  唐行きさん  【からゆきさん】  karayuki-san, young Japanese women who were sent to work (mainly as prostitutes) in foreign countries, esp. in Southeast Asia (Meiji to early Showa)
  愛様  【いとさん】  daughter (of a good family)

  横  【よこ】  horizontal (as opposed to vertical), lying down, side-to-side (as opposed to front-to-back), width, breadth, side (of a box, etc.), beside, aside, next to, unconnected
  横切る  【よこぎる】  to cross (e.g. road), to traverse
  真横  【まよこ】  directly horizontal, right beside
  縦中横  【たてちゅうよこ】  using horizontal characters in vertical writing

  橋  【はし】  bridge
  橋渡し  【はしわたし】  bridge building, mediation, go-between, intermediary, (through the) good offices (of someone)
  舟橋  【ふなはし】  pontoon
  浮き橋  【うきはし】  floating bridge, pontoon bridge

  次ぐ  【つぐ】  to rank next to, to come after
  次ぐ身  【つぐみ】  next in line, heir
  次  【つぎ】  next, following, subsequent, stage, station
  次々  【つぎつぎ】  in succession, one by one
  取次  【とりつぎ】  agency, commission, distributor, intermediation, reception (of guests), conveyance (of messages)
  中継ぎ  【なかつぎ】  joining, joint, intermediation, relaying, intermediary, relay, agency, brokerage, mid-relief pitcher, middle reliever

  齢  【よわい】  (one's) age
  歯  【は】  tooth
  歯医者  【はいしゃ】  dentist
  継ぎ歯  【つぎば】  capped tooth, (dental) crown
  年端  【としは】  age, years (old)
  齢  【よわい】  (one's) age

  死ぬ  【しぬ】  to die, to pass away, to lose spirit, to lose vigor, to look dead, to cease, to stop
  死ぬまで戦う  【しぬまでたたかう】  to fight to the last (death)

  氷  【こおり】  ice, shaved ice (usually served with flavored simple syrup)
  氷水  【こおりみず】  ice water, shaved ice (usually served with flavored simple syrup)
  雪氷  【せっぴょう】  snow and ice, snow ice, frozen snow
  いかり氷  【いかりこおり】  anchor ice, bottom-fast ice
  氷  【ひ】  ice, hail
  氷河  【ひょうが】  glacier
  凍る  【こおる】  to freeze, to be frozen over, to congeal

  決める  【きめる】  to decide, to choose, to determine, to make up one's mind, to resolve, to set one's heart on, to settle, to arrange, to set, to appoint, to fix, to clinch (a victory), to decide (the outcome of a match), to persist in doing, to go through with, to always do, to have made a habit of, to take for granted, to assume, to dress up, to dress to kill, to dress to the nines, to carry out successfully (a move in sports, a pose in dance, etc.), to succeed in doing, to immobilize with a double-arm lock (in sumo, judo, etc.), to eat or drink something, to take illegal drugs
  決まる  【きまる】  to be decided, to be settled, to look good in (clothes)
  決る  【しゃくる】  to dig out, to gouge out, to hollow out, to scoop, to ladle, to bail, to jerk (one's chin)

  油  【あぶら】  oil
  油絵  【あぶらえ】  oil painting
  匂い油  【においあぶら】  perfumed hair oil
  機械油  【きかいあぶら】  machine oil

  波  【なみ】  wave
  波打つ  【なみうつ】  to dash against, to undulate, to wave, to heave, to beat fast (heart)
  荒波  【あらなみ】  raging waves, stormy seas, hardships, troubles, adversities
  高波  【たかなみ】  high waves

  注ぐ  【そそぐ】  to pour (into), to sprinkle on (from above), to water (e.g. plants), to pour onto, to spray, to shed (tears), to concentrate one's energy (strength, attention, etc.) on, to devote to, to fix (one's eyes) on, to flow into (e.g. of a river), to run into, to drain into, to fall (of rain, snow), to pour down
  注す  【さす】  to pour, to add (liquid), to serve (drinks), to put on (lipstick, etc.), to apply, to colour, to dye, to light (a fire), to burn
  注ぐ  【つぐ】  to pour (into a vessel), to fill (a cup, bowl, etc.) with, to dish out (food or drink)

  泳ぐ  【およぐ】  to swim



  流れる  【ながれる】  to stream, to flow (liquid, time, etc.), to run (ink), to be washed away, to be carried, to drift, to float (e.g. clouds), to wander, to stray, to sweep (e.g. rumour, fire), to spread, to circulate, to be heard (e.g. music), to be played, to lapse (e.g. into indolence, despair), to pass, to elapse, to be transmitted, to be called off, to be forfeited, to disappear, to be removed
  流れ  【ながれ】  stream, current, flow, course of events
  流れる  【ながれる】  to stream, to flow (liquid, time, etc.), to run (ink), to be washed away, to be carried, to drift, to float (e.g. clouds), to wander, to stray, to sweep (e.g. rumour, fire), to spread, to circulate, to be heard (e.g. music), to be played, to lapse (e.g. into indolence, despair), to pass, to elapse, to be transmitted, to be called off, to be forfeited, to disappear, to be removed
  流す  【ながす】  to drain, to pour, to spill, to shed (blood, tears), to wash away, to distribute (e.g. electricity over wires, music over a PA system, etc.), to circulate, to broadcast, to beam, to cruise (e.g. taxi), to float, to set adrift, to call off (a meeting, etc.), to exile, to banish

  消える  【きえる】  to go out, to vanish, to disappear
  消す  【けす】  to erase, to delete, to cross out, to turn off power, to extinguish, to put out, to bump off

  深い  【ふかい】  deep, profound, dense, thick, close (relationship), intense, strong, late
  深い愛情  【ふかいあいじょう】  deep affection, devotion, profound attachment
  深まる  【ふかまる】  to deepen, to heighten, to intensify
  深める  【ふかめる】  to deepen, to heighten, to intensify

  暖か  【あたたか】  warm, mild, genial
  暖かい  【あたたかい】  warm, mild, (pleasantly) hot, considerate, kind, genial, warm (of a colour), mellow, having enough money
  暖かい  【あたたかい】  warm, mild, (pleasantly) hot, considerate, kind, genial, warm (of a colour), mellow, having enough money
  温かい歓迎  【あたたかいかんげい】  warm reception, cordial welcome, warm greeting
  温まる  【あたたまる】  to warm oneself, to sun oneself, to warm up, to get warm
  温める  【あたためる】  to warm, to heat
  温  【ぬく】  idiot, dummy, slow person
  温い  【ぬるい】  lukewarm, tepid, lenient, slow, stupid
  温々  【ぬくぬく】  comfortably, snugly, cosily, easy, carefree, freshly made and still warm

  港  【みなと】  harbour, harbor, port
  港町  【みなとまち】  port city

  湖  【みずうみ】  lake
  白鳥の湖  【はくちょうのみずうみ】  Swan Lake (ballet)

  湯  【ゆ】  hot water, hot bath, hot spring, molten iron
  湯気  【ゆげ】  steam, vapour, vapor
  茶の湯  【ちゃのゆ】  tea ceremony
  共同湯  【きょうどうゆ】  public bath, communal bath



  炭  【すみ】  charcoal, charred remains
  炭火  【すみび】  charcoal fire
  正炭  【しょうすみ】  first adding of charcoal to the fire (tea ceremony)
  竹炭  【たけすみ】  bamboo charcoal

  物  【もの】  thing, object, article, stuff, substance, one's things, possessions, property, belongings, things, something, anything, everything, nothing, quality, reason, the way of things, used to emphasize emotion, judgment, etc., used to indicate a common occurrence in the past (after a verb in past tense), used to indicate a general tendency, used to indicate something that should happen, item classified as ..., item related to ..., work of ..., cause of ..., cause for ..., somehow, somewhat, for some reason, really, truly
  物語  【ものがたり】  tale, story, legend
  買い物  【かいもの】  shopping, purchased goods
  生き物  【いきもの】  living thing, animal

  玉  【たま】  ball, sphere, globe, orb, bead (of sweat, dew, etc.), drop, droplet, ball (in sports), pile (of noodles, etc.), bullet, bulb (i.e. a light bulb), lens (of glasses, etc.), bead (of an abacus), ball (i.e. a testicle), gem, jewel (esp. spherical; sometimes used figuratively), pearl, female entertainer (e.g. a geisha), person (when commenting on their nature), character, item, funds or person used as part of a plot, egg, coin, precious, beautiful, excellent
  玉突き  【たまつき】  billiards, pool, serial collisions (of cars)
  電気の球  【でんきのたま】  electric (light) bulb

  由  【よし】  reason, significance, cause, piece of information that one has heard, I hear that ..., it is said that ...
  由ありげ  【よしありげ】  meaningful, suggestive, seeming to be with a history, seeming to be with circumstances that are hard to explain
  候由  【そうろうよし】  I hear that ...
  因る  【よる】  to be due to, to be caused by, to depend on, to turn on, to be based on, to come from, to be based at (a location, an organization), to be headquartered at

  申す  【もうす】  to say, to be called, to do
  申  【さる】  ninth sign of Chinese zodiac (The Monkey, 3pm-5pm, west-southwest, July)
  申年  【さるどし】  year of the monkey
  甲申  【きのえさる】  twenty-first of the sexagenary cycle
  壬申  【みずのえさる】  ninth of the sexagenary cycle





  病む  【やむ】  to fall ill, to suffer from, to have something wrong with
  病  【やまい】  illness, disease, bad habit, weakness, fault
  病は気から  【やまいはきから】  sickness and health start with the mind
  恋病  【こいやまい】  lovesickness
  躁鬱病  【そううつびょう】  manic depression, manic-depressive psychosis, bipolar disorder

  立つ  【たつ】  to stand, to rise, to stand up, to find oneself (e.g. in a difficult position), to depart (on a plane, train, etc.)
  暴く  【あばく】  to disclose, to divulge, to expose, to open (and rob) a grave

  上る  【のぼる】  to ascend, to go up, to climb, to ascend (as a natural process, e.g. the sun), to rise, to go to (the capital), to be promoted, to add up to, to advance (in price), to swim up (a river), to sail up, to come up (on the agenda)

  皮  【かわ】  skin, hide, pelt, fur, rind, peel, husk, bark, shell, sheath, wrapping, mask (hiding one's true nature), seeming
  皮切り  【かわきり】  beginning, start
  一皮  【ひとかわ】  unmasking
  薄皮  【うすかわ】  thin skin







  真  【ま】  just, right, due (east), pure, genuine, true, truth
  愛  【まな】  beloved, dear
  誠に  【まことに】  indeed, really, absolutely, truly, actually, very, quite
  実しやか  【まことしやか】  plausible (e.g. of a rumour), believable (e.g. of a story), specious (e.g. of an argument), credible (e.g. of a lie), looking very like the truth
  嘘から出た実  【うそからでたまこと】  truth comes out of falsehood, many a true word is spoken in jest

  着る  【きる】  to wear (in modern Japanese, from the shoulders down), to put on, to bear (guilt, etc.)
  着類  【きるい】  clothing
  着せる  【きせる】  to put clothes on (someone), to plate, to gild, to veneer, to accuse (of some crime), to give (a bad name)
  着く  【つく】  to arrive at, to reach, to sit on, to sit at (e.g. the table)
  着くや否や  【つくやいなや】  ... had hardly arrived before ...
  付ける  【つける】  to attach, to join, to add, to append, to affix, to stick, to glue, to fasten, to sew on, to apply (ointment), to furnish (a house with), to wear, to put on, to keep a diary, to make an entry, to appraise, to set (a price), to allot, to budget, to assign, to bring alongside, to place (under guard or doctor), to follow, to shadow, to load, to give (courage to), to keep (an eye on), to establish (relations or understanding), to turn on (light), to produce flowers, to produce fruit

  短い  【みじかい】  short

  研ぐ  【とぐ】  to sharpen, to hone, to whet, to grind, to wash (rice), to scour, to polish, to burnish



  神  【かみ】  god, deity, divinity, spirit, kami, incredible, fantastic, emperor of Japan, thunder
  神様  【かみさま】  God, god, ace, king, superior person, god (amongst men)
  大神  【おおかみ】  god
  ギ神  【ギかみ】  Greek mythology

  祭る  【まつる】  to deify, to enshrine, to pray, to worship
  祭  【まつり】  festival, feast
  祭り上げる  【まつりあげる】  to set up (in high position), to kick upstairs
  お祭り  【おまつり】  festival, feast, carnival
  秋祭り  【あきまつり】  autumn festival, fall festival
  祭  【まつり】  festival, feast
  祭り上げる  【まつりあげる】  to set up (in high position), to kick upstairs
  お祭り  【おまつり】  festival, feast, carnival
  秋祭り  【あきまつり】  autumn festival, fall festival





  極める  【きわめる】  to carry to extremes, to go to the end of something, to investigate thoroughly, to master



  童  【わらべ】  child
  わらべ歌  【わらべうた】  children's song, nursery song
  京童  【きょうわらべ】  Kyoto's children, Kyoto's young people, who are noisy and gossiping on the least pretext
  小童  【こわっぱ】  boy, child, youth, brat

  笛  【ふえ】  flute, fife, pipe, recorder, flageolet, shakuhachi, clarinet, whistle
  笛吹  【ふえふき】  flute player
  鷺笛  【さぎふえ】  longspine snipefish (Macroramphosus scolopax), common bellowsfish, snipe-fish, snipefish, spine trumpet fish, trumpetfish
  笙の笛  【しょうのふえ】  sho (Japanese free reed musical instrument)



  筆  【ふで】  writing brush
  筆跡  【ひっせき】  handwriting, calligraphy specimen, example of penmanship, holograph
  面相筆  【めんそうふで】  fine-point brushes
  焼き筆  【やきふで】  wooden stick with a burned tip (used to create underdrawings)

  等しい  【ひとしい】  equal, similar, like, equivalent
  等  【など】  et cetera, etc., and the like, and so forth, or something, the likes of
  等々  【とうとう】  etc., et cetera, and so on
  等々  【とうとう】  etc., et cetera, and so on

  箱  【はこ】  box, case, chest, package, pack, crate, car (of a train, etc.), shamisen case, shamisen, public building, community building, man who carries a geisha's shamisen, receptacle for human waste, feces (faeces), counter for boxes (or boxed objects)
  箱詰め  【はこづめ】  packed in a box (e.g. chocolates)
  リサイクル用の箱  【リサイクルようのはこ】  recycling bin, recycling box
  契約の箱  【けいやくのはこ】  Ark of the Covenant



  終わる  【おわる】  to finish, to end, to close
  終わる  【おわる】  to finish, to end, to close
  終える  【おえる】  to finish, to graduate
  終  【つい】  end, final, end of life, death, never, not at all
  遂に  【ついに】  finally, at last, in the end
  遂に  【ついに】  finally, at last, in the end

  緑  【みどり】  green, greenery (esp. fresh verdure)
  緑色  【みどりいろ】  green, emerald green, green color of new foliage, verdure
  黄緑  【きみどり】  pea green, yellow-green
  青緑  【あおみどり】  blue-green, turquoise, aqua

  練る  【ねる】  to knead, to thicken into a paste (stirring over a flame), to polish (a plan, etc.), to refine, to elaborate, to work out, to train, to drill, to exercise, to gloss (silk), to soften, to degum, to tan (leather), to temper (steel), to walk in procession, to parade, to march
  練り  【ねり】  kneading, gloss, tempering, paste (e.g. bean paste, mustard paste), parading of portable shrines and floats at festivals
  練り直す  【ねりなおす】  to knead again, to rework, to revise, to polish

  羊  【ひつじ】  sheep (Ovis aries)
  羊飼い  【ひつじかい】  shepherd, shepherdess
  牡羊  【おひつじ】  ram
  贖罪の羊  【しょくざいのひつじ】  sacrificial lamb

  美しい  【うつくしい】  beautiful, lovely
  美しい文  【うつくしいあや】  beautiful design

  習う  【ならう】  to take lessons in, to be taught, to learn (from a teacher), to study (under a teacher), to get training in
  習うより慣れろ  【ならうよりなれろ】  experience is the best teacher, custom makes all things easy, you learn best by doing, practice makes perfect, it is better to grow accustomed than to be taught
  習い  【ならい】  as is habit, the way life normally is
  習い事  【ならいごと】  accomplishment, lesson, practice
  見習い  【みならい】  apprenticeship, probation, learning by observation, apprentice, trainee, probationer
  行儀見習い  【ぎょうぎみならい】  learning good manners through apprenticeship (to an upper-class family)

  者  【もの】  person
  者ども  【ものども】  you, people
  弱き者  【よわきもの】  weak person, the weak
  若い者  【わかいもの】  young man, young woman, young people, youth, youngsters, young employee, young manservant, young follower

  育つ  【そだつ】  to be raised (e.g. child), to be brought up, to grow (up)
  育ち  【そだち】  breeding, growth
  育ち盛り  【そだちざかり】  growth period (in children)
  育てる  【そだてる】  to raise, to rear, to bring up, to train, to teach, to educate, to promote the growth of, to nurture, to foster, to develop
  育む  【はぐくむ】  to raise, to bring up, to rear, to cultivate, to foster, to nurture

  苦しい  【くるしい】  painful, difficult, tough, hard, distressing, (psychologically) difficult, stressful, awkward (e.g. position), straitened (circumstances), tight (financial situation), needy, struggling, strained (interpretation, explanation, etc.), lame (e.g. excuse), forced (e.g. smile), far-fetched, hard to do, unpleasant
  苦しい言い訳  【くるしいいいわけ】  lame excuse, poor excuse
  苦しむ  【くるしむ】  to suffer, to groan, to be worried
  苦しめる  【くるしめる】  to torment, to pain, to inflict (physical) pain, to hurt, to harass, to cause (emotional) pain, to afflict, to distress, to bother, to trouble, to stump, to baffle
  苦い  【にがい】  bitter
  苦い薬  【にがいくすり】  bitter medicine
  苦る  【にがる】  to feel bitter, to scowl

  荷  【に】  load, baggage, cargo, freight, goods, burden, responsibility
  荷物  【にもつ】  luggage, baggage, package, burden, payload (of a packet, cell, etc.)
  浮き荷  【うきに】  flotsam
  抜き荷  【ぬきに】  pilfered goods

  落ちる  【おちる】  to fall down, to drop, to fall (e.g. rain), to sink (e.g. sun or moon), to fall onto (e.g. light or one's gaze), to be used in a certain place (e.g. money), to be omitted, to be missing, to decrease, to sink, to fail (e.g. exam or class), to lose (contest, election, etc.), to crash, to degenerate, to degrade, to fall behind, to become indecent (of a conversation), to be ruined, to go under, to fade, to come out (e.g. a stain), to come off (e.g. makeup), to be removed (e.g. illness, possessing spirit, name on a list), to fall (into someone's hands), to become someone's possession, to fall (into a trap), to fall (for a trick), to give in, to give up, to confess, to flee, to fall, to be defeated, to surrender, to come to (in the end), to end in, to fall (in love, asleep, etc.), to swoon (judo), to consent, to understand, to crash, to freeze, to die, to move to the depths
  落ち  【おち】  slip, omission, outcome, final result, the end, punch line (of a joke)
  落ちる  【おちる】  to fall down, to drop, to fall (e.g. rain), to sink (e.g. sun or moon), to fall onto (e.g. light or one's gaze), to be used in a certain place (e.g. money), to be omitted, to be missing, to decrease, to sink, to fail (e.g. exam or class), to lose (contest, election, etc.), to crash, to degenerate, to degrade, to fall behind, to become indecent (of a conversation), to be ruined, to go under, to fade, to come out (e.g. a stain), to come off (e.g. makeup), to be removed (e.g. illness, possessing spirit, name on a list), to fall (into someone's hands), to become someone's possession, to fall (into a trap), to fall (for a trick), to give in, to give up, to confess, to flee, to fall, to be defeated, to surrender, to come to (in the end), to end in, to fall (in love, asleep, etc.), to swoon (judo), to consent, to understand, to crash, to freeze, to die, to move to the depths
  付け落ち  【つけおち】  omission in a bill
  鳩尾  【みぞおち】  pit of the stomach, solar plexus, place where water falls
  落とす  【おとす】  to drop, to lose, to let fall, to shed (light), to cast (one's gaze), to pour in (liquid), to leave behind, to clean off (dirt, makeup, paint, etc.), to remove (e.g. stains or facial hair), to lose, to spend money at a certain place, to omit, to leave out, to secretly let escape, to lose (a match), to reject (an applicant), to fail (a course), to defeat (in an election), to lower (e.g. shoulders or voice), to lessen (e.g. production or body weight), to worsen (quality), to reduce (e.g. rank or popularity), to speak badly of, to make light of, to fall into straitened circumstances, to fall into (e.g. a dilemma or sin), to make one's own, to have one's bid accepted, to force surrender, to take (e.g. an enemy camp or castle), to forcefully convince, to press for a confession, to deal with, to download, to copy from a computer to another medium, to make someone swoon (judo), to finish a story (e.g. with the punch line), to finish (a period, e.g. of fasting)

  葉  【は】  leaf, blade (of grass), (pine) needle
  葉書  【はがき】  postcard, memo, note, card
  枝葉  【しよう】  branches and leaves, foliage, unimportant details, nonessentials, side issue, digression
  一葉  【いちよう】  one leaf, one page, one sheet, one card, one photo, one boat

  薬  【くすり】  medicine, pharmaceuticals, (legal) drugs, pill, ointment, salve, efficacious chemical (gunpowder, pesticide, etc.), (pottery) glaze, small bribe
  薬指  【くすりゆび】  ring finger, fourth finger
  良く効く薬  【よくきくくすり】  very efficacious medicine

  血  【ち】  blood, consanguinity
  血筋  【ちすじ】  lineage, stock, strain, blood relationship
  生き血  【いきち】  lifeblood
  悪血  【あくち】  impure blood

  表  【おもて】  surface, face (i.e. the visible side of an object), front (of a building, etc.), obverse side (i.e. "head") of a coin, outside, exterior, appearance, public, first half (of an inning), top (of an inning), cover (for tatami mats, etc.), foreground
  表向き  【おもてむき】  outward appearance, ostensible, public, official
  裏表  【うらおもて】  back and front, inside and outside, both sides, inside out (e.g. clothing), double-dealing, two faces (c.f. two-faced), outward appearance and actual condition, inner workings
  矢面  【やおもて】  firing line, position where one is subject to questioning, criticism, etc., direction of a flying arrow (fired by the enemy)
  表す  【あらわす】  to represent, to signify, to stand for, to reveal, to show, to display, to express, to make widely known
  現れる  【あらわれる】  to appear, to come in sight, to become visible, to come out, to embody, to materialize, to materialise, to be expressed (e.g. emotions), to become apparent (e.g. trends, effects)
  表す  【あらわす】  to represent, to signify, to stand for, to reveal, to show, to display, to express, to make widely known

  歌  【うた】  song, classical Japanese poetry (esp. tanka), modern poetry

  調べる  【しらべる】  to examine, to look up, to investigate, to check up, to sense, to study, to inquire, to search
  調べ  【しらべ】  investigation, inspection, examination, tune, note, melody
  調べる  【しらべる】  to examine, to look up, to investigate, to check up, to sense, to study, to inquire, to search
  取り調べ  【とりしらべ】  investigation (e.g. by police or prosecutors), examination, inquiry, enquiry
  整う  【ととのう】  to be ready, to be prepared, to be arranged, to be in order, to be put in order, to be well-ordered, to be well-proportioned, to be harmonious, to be adjusted, to be regulated, to be refined (e.g. of a face), to be settled (e.g. treaty, contract), to be completed
  整える  【ととのえる】  to put in order, to arrange, to tidy up, to straighten, to adjust, to fix, to get ready, to prepare, to arrange, to supply, to assemble, to buy, to work out (e.g. business deal), to arrange (e.g. marriage), to settle



  豆  【まめ】  legume (esp. edible legumes or their seeds, such as beans, peas, pulses, etc.), beans, peas, soya bean (Glycine max), soybean, soy, female genitalia (esp. the clitoris), kidney, miniature, tiny, child
  豆知識  【まめちしき】  trivia, bits of knowledge
  枝豆  【えだまめ】  edamame (green soybeans)
  ライ豆  【ライまめ】  lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus), butter bean

  負ける  【まける】  to lose, to be defeated, to succumb, to give in, to surrender, to yield, to be inferior to, to break out in a rash due to (e.g. lacquer, shaving, etc.), to reduce the price, to give a discount, to throw in (something extra) for free
  負けるが勝ち  【まけるがかち】  he that fights and runs away may live to fight another day, sometimes you have to lose to win
  負かす  【まかす】  to defeat
  負う  【おう】  to bear, to carry on one's back, to take responsibility for, to accept a duty, to be injured, to owe
  負うた子に教えられて浅瀬を渡る  【おうたこにおしえられてあさせをわたる】  a fool may give a wise man counsel

  起きる  【おきる】  to get up, to rise, to blaze up (fire), to wake up, to be awake, to stay awake, to occur (usu. of unfavourable incidents), to happen, to take place
  起こる  【おこる】  to occur, to happen
  起こす  【おこす】  to raise, to raise up, to set up, to pick up, to wake, to wake up, to waken, to awaken, to cause, to bring about, to lead to, to trigger, to give rise to, to create, to generate (e.g. heat, electricity), to produce, to start, to begin, to launch, to establish, to found, to set up, to open, to plough, to plow, to till, to fall ill with, to transcribe, to write down (what is spoken), to turn over (a card)
  起こす  【おこす】  to raise, to raise up, to set up, to pick up, to wake, to wake up, to waken, to awaken, to cause, to bring about, to lead to, to trigger, to give rise to, to create, to generate (e.g. heat, electricity), to produce, to start, to begin, to launch, to establish, to found, to set up, to open, to plough, to plow, to till, to fall ill with, to transcribe, to write down (what is spoken), to turn over (a card)
  起つ  【たつ】  to rise up, to initiate (political) action

  道  【みち】  road, street, way, path, course, route, lane, distance, ways (e.g. "a long ways"), the way (of proper conduct, etc.), one's way, morals, teachings (esp. Confucian or Buddhist), dogma, field (of medicine, etc.), subject, way, method, means
  道教え  【みちおしえ】  tiger beetle (esp. the Japanese tiger beetle, Cicindela japonica)
  険しい道  【けわしいみち】  steep street
  長路  【ながみち】  long road, far journey

  身  【み】  body, oneself, one's place, one's position, main part, meat (as opposed to bone, skin, etc.), wood (as opposed to bark), blade (as opposed to its handle), container (as opposed to its lid)
  味方  【みかた】  friend, ally, supporter, taking sides with, supporting, standing by, backing up
  生身  【なまみ】  living flesh, flesh and blood, physical body of Buddha or a bodhisattva
  入れ墨  【いれずみ】  tattoo

  転がる  【ころがる】  to roll, to tumble, to fall over, to roll over, to lie down, to be scattered about, to be common, (of a situation or outcome) to change, to turn out
  転げる  【ころげる】  to roll over, to tumble, to roll about (with laughter)
  転がす  【ころがす】  to roll, to turn over, to tip over, to throw down, to leave, to buy and sell (quickly for a profit)
  転ぶ  【ころぶ】  to fall down, to fall over, to turn out, to play out, to abandon Christianity (and convert to Buddhism), to apostatize, to roll, to tumble, (for a geisha) to prostitute (herself) in secret
  転ぶ  【ころぶ】  to fall down, to fall over, to turn out, to play out, to abandon Christianity (and convert to Buddhism), to apostatize, to roll, to tumble, (for a geisha) to prostitute (herself) in secret
  うたた寝  【うたたね】  dozing, napping (e.g. on the floor in one's clothes, in the train)
  眩めく  【くるめく】  to spin, to revolve, to twirl, to be dizzy, to feel faint, to bustle about

  軽い  【かるい】  light (i.e. not heavy), feeling light (i.e. offering little resistance, moving easily), light (i.e. of foot), effortless, nimble, agile, non-serious, minor, unimportant, trivial, slight, small, gentle, soft, easy, lighthearted (e.g. joke), easy, simple, indiscriminate
  軽石  【かるいし】  pumice stone
  軽やか  【かろやか】  light, easy, non-serious, minor
  軽んじる  【かろんじる】  to look down on, to make light of



  返す  【かえす】  to return (something), to restore, to put back, to turn over, to turn upside down, to overturn, to pay back, to retaliate, to reciprocate, to repeat ..., to do ... back
  返す返す  【かえすがえす】  repeatedly, to a tremendous extent
  返る  【かえる】  to return, to come back, to go back, to turn over, to become extremely, to become completely

  追う  【おう】  to chase, to run after, to pursue, to follow after, to follow (a set order, a trend, etc.), to drive out, to get rid of, to oust, to expel, to drive (e.g. a herd), to be pressed (e.g. for time)

  送る  【おくる】  to send (a thing), to dispatch, to despatch, to transmit, to take or escort (a person somewhere), to see off (a person), to bid farewell (to the departed), to bury, to spend (time), to live one's life, to pass (down the line), to affix okurigana

  早い  【はやい】  fast, quick, hasty, brisk, early (in the day, etc.), premature, (too) soon, not yet, (too) early, easy, simple, quick
  早める  【はやめる】  to bring forward (e.g. by 3 hours), to advance, to hasten (e.g. one's death), to expedite, to precipitate, to quicken (e.g. one's step), to speed up, to accelerate
  速やか  【すみやか】  speedy, prompt, smooth

  進む  【すすむ】  to advance, to go forward, to precede, to go ahead (of), to make progress, to improve, to deepen, to heighten, to be fast (of a clock), to be ahead, to do of one's own free will
  進める  【すすめる】  to advance, to move forward, to put (a clock, watch) forward, to carry forward (plans, work, etc.), to proceed with, to make progress in, to further, to advance, to hasten, to speed up, to raise, to elevate, to promote, to develop, to stimulate (e.g. one's appetite)

  遊ぶ  【あそぶ】  to play, to enjoy oneself, to have a good time, to mess about (with alcohol, gambling, philandery, etc.), to be idle, to do nothing, to be unused, to go to (for pleasure or for study), to intentionally throw a ball to lower the batter's concentration
  遊ばす  【あそばす】  to let one play, to leave idle, to do

  運ぶ  【はこぶ】  to carry, to transport, to move, to convey, to come, to go, to wield (a tool, etc.), to use, to go (well, etc.), to proceed, to progress



  都  【みやこ】  capital, metropolis, seat of government, capital (of music, fashion, etc.), city (e.g. of light), location of the Imperial Palace
  都入り  【みやこいり】  arriving in the capital
  森の都  【もりのみやこ】  tree-clad town
  住めば都  【すめばみやこ】  you can get used to living anywhere, home is where you make it, wherever I lay my hat is home

  配る  【くばる】  to distribute, to deliver, to deal (cards)

  酒  【さけ】  alcohol, sake
  酒飲み  【さけのみ】  (heavy) drinker, drunkard, tippler, boozer
  渋い酒  【しぶいさけ】  rough wine, cheap wine
  手酌酒  【てじゃくさけ】  pouring one's own drinks, drinking alone

  重  【え】  -fold, -ply
  二重  【にじゅう】  double, two-fold, two layers, duplex, diplo-, dipl-, double-edged eyelid, double eyelid, creased eyelid
  九重  【ここのえ】  ninefold, imperial palace, the Court
  重い  【おもい】  heavy, weighty, massive, heavy (feeling), depressed, gloomy, blue, uneasy, slow, sluggish, lumbering, ponderous, clumsy, important, serious, grave, serious, severe, critical, solid, established, dignified, sensible
  重い故障  【おもいこしょう】  hard failure
  重り  【おもり】  weight, sinker (fishing)
  重ねる  【かさねる】  to pile up, to put something on top of another, to stack up, to repeat many times over, to go through something repeatedly
  重なる  【かさなる】  to be piled up, to lie on top of one another, to come one after another, to happen over and over, to pile up (e.g. stress), to accumulate, to overlap (each other), to occur at the same time, to happen simultaneously
  主  【おも】  chief, main, principal, important, main secondary or supporting role (in kyogen)
  重い  【おもい】  heavy, weighty, massive, heavy (feeling), depressed, gloomy, blue, uneasy, slow, sluggish, lumbering, ponderous, clumsy, important, serious, grave, serious, severe, critical, solid, established, dignified, sensible
  身重  【みおも】  pregnant
  気重  【きおも】  heavy-hearted

  黒金  【くろがね】  iron

  銀  【ぎん】  silver (Ag), silver coin, money, silver medal, silver colour, silver color, bank, silver general
  銀鯵  【しろがねあじ】  lookdown (Selene vomer)

  開く  【ひらく】  to open, to undo, to unseal, to unpack, to bloom, to unfold, to spread out, to open (for business, e.g. in the morning), to be wide (gap, etc.), to widen, to hold (meeting, etc.), to give, to open, to found (nation, dynasty, sect, etc.), to open (a new business), to set up, to establish, to start, to open (ports, borders, etc.), to open (an account), to open up (new land, path, etc.), to clear, to develop, to open (a file, etc.), to extract (root), to reduce (equation), to cut open (fish), to change (kanji into hiragana), to flare (e.g. skirt), to slacken (into a poor posture)
  開き  【ひらき】  opening, gap, dried and opened fish
  開き直る  【ひらきなおる】  to become defiant, to turn upon, to become serious
  開ける  【ひらける】  to become opened up, to improve, to get better, to develop, to progress, to become civilized (civilised), to be up-to-date, to be enlightened, to be sensible
  開く  【あく】  to open (e.g. doors), to open (e.g. business, etc.), to be empty, to be vacant, to be available, to be free, to be open (e.g. neckline, etc.), to have been opened (of one's eyes, mouth, etc.), to come to an end, to open (one's eyes, mouth, etc.), to have a hole, to form a gap, to have an interval (between events)
  開ける  【あける】  to open (a door, etc.), to unwrap (e.g. parcel, package), to unlock, to open (for business, etc.), to empty, to remove, to make space, to make room, to move out, to clear out, to be away from (e.g. one's house), to leave (temporarily), to dawn, to grow light, to end (of a period, season), to begin (of the New Year), to leave (one's schedule) open, to make time (for), to make (a hole), to open up (a hole)



  日  【ひ】  day, days, sun, sunshine, sunlight, case (esp. unfortunate), event
  日差し  【ひざし】  sunlight, rays of the sun

  階  【きざはし】  stairs, stairs at the front of a noh stage

  集まる  【あつまる】  to gather, to collect, to assemble
  集める  【あつめる】  to collect, to assemble, to gather
  集う  【つどう】  to meet, to assemble, to congregate

  面  【おもて】  face, surface, mask (esp. a noh or kyogen mask)
  面白い  【おもしろい】  interesting, fascinating, intriguing, enthralling, amusing, funny, comical, pleasant, enjoyable, agreeable, fun
  水の面  【みのも】  surface of the water, face of the water
  面  【おもて】  face, surface, mask (esp. a noh or kyogen mask)
  面伏せ  【おもてぶせ】  being so embarrassed as to keep one's face down
  矢面  【やおもて】  firing line, position where one is subject to questioning, criticism, etc., direction of a flying arrow (fired by the enemy)
  細面  【ほそおもて】  slender face
  面  【つら】  face, mug, surface, cheek meat, cheek, cheeks, surrounding area
  面汚し  【つらよごし】  disgrace, shame
  赤面  【あかつら】  red face, villain (in kabuki, jōruri, etc.)
  横面  【よこつら】  side of face



  飲む  【のむ】  to drink, to gulp, to swallow, to take (medicine), to smoke (tobacco), to engulf, to overwhelm, to keep down, to suppress, to accept (e.g. demand, condition), to make light of, to conceal
  飲む打つ買う  【のむうつかう】  drinking, gambling, and buying women in prostitution

  館  【やかた】  mansion, small castle, nobleman, noblewoman, boat cabin
  夏館  【なつやかた】  villa arranged appropriately for summer, mansion arranged appropriately for summer
  館  【やかた】  mansion, small castle, nobleman, noblewoman, boat cabin



  鼻  【はな】  nose
  鼻水  【はなみず】  nasal mucus, dripping nose, snot
  目鼻  【めはな】  eyes and nose, looks, facial features, shape, form
  赤鼻  【あかはな】  red nose

